# Add-on configuraion manual

In order to get a model to track properly, a few conditions on the model needs
to be present. In this document we will go through these and how to set it up.

The word blendshape and shape key is used interchangebly in this document.

# Model properties

This first section will go through how to select the correct parts of your
model in the "Model properties" section. Every field in this section needs to
be filled before allowing the model to be tracked. These settings will take
effect when you start the tracking. If you change it during tracking it will
not take effect until you stop and start again.

![](images/properties2.jpg)

## Armature

The armature should point to the armature that belongs to the model that you
want to track. The bones of this armature will be the ones available to select
in the later fields.

## Bones

Once the armature has been selected, the bone fields will be pre-populated
with the most common names for the respective bone. The common naming for the
bones required by this add-on is [Head, Chest, Hips, LeftEye, RightEye]. All
bones are used when OpenSeeFace tracking is selected. If another tracking
method is selected, [LeftEye, RightEye] will not be used. However they still
need to be selected in order for the add-on to allow you to start tracking.

If the model is not moving as expected there might be some bone that is not in
its proper place or the wrong bone is selected.

### Eye bone position

If you use OpenSeeFace as your tracking data producer, the eye bones need to
be in a specific position for them to rotate correctly. The bone head should
be placed at the center of the eye ball and the tail should point straight up.
See the images for example.

![](images/eye1.jpg)![](images/eye2.jpg)

## Facemesh

The facemesh property is used for all blendshapes. The mesh should contain
vowel and blinking blendshapes if OpenSeeFace is used, or ARKit blendshapes if
VTube Studio tracking is used. For ARKit blendshapes the naming should follow
the standard. <https://arkit-face-blendshapes.com/>

OpenSeeFace blendshape list. One of each should exist. Any of the names on the
same line can be used for the blendshape.

  * a, あ
  * i, い
  * u, う
  * e, え
  * o, お
  * blink_left, ウィンク
  * blink_right, ウインク右

If your model is not doing a certain movement, for example not blinking, the
name of the blendshape may be wrong. It must match for it to work. Capitalization needs to be correct as well.

Regarding performance, it is not recommended to have your entire model as one
single mesh. While it is possible to make that work it may use a lot of
resources to apply blendshapes to a large mesh. It is recommended to separate
the head/face from body, clothes and hair to increase performance.

# Tracker settings

The tracker settings will allow you to specify which kind of tracking you want
to use. The alternatives are OpenSeeFace, VTube Studio(iPhone) or
MeowFace(Android). MeowFace uses the same specification as VTube Studio so
either can be used.

## OpenSeeFace

When using OpenSeeFace, a listening port needs to be specified. The default
value will be sufficient in most cases unless you change it on your
OpenSeeFace data producer.

![](images/tracker_settings.jpg)

## VTube Studio or MeowFace

VTube Studio or MeowFace needs to have an IP entered that points to the device
that will produce the tracking data. Your phone should be connected to the
same network as the computer that is running this add-on. Enter the IP address
of your phone into the "Phone IP" field. For VTube Studio you need to enable
3rd party application support at the bottom of the settings page for it to
work. Listening port can be set to anything but the default value is good.
Only change this if you have conflicting ports.

![](images/tracker_settings2.jpg)

# Tweaks

Following is the list of settings that can change the behavour of the model
during tracking. Some settings will be applied instantly but some needs the
tracking to restart in order to take effect.

![](images/tweaks.jpg)

## Framerate

The framerate is the amount of times per second that the mode will update. The
higher this value is the more smooth the tracking will be but it will also use
more resources. In order for this value to take effect the tracking needs to
be restarted.

## Smoothing

The add-on uses floating average to apply smoothing. It is only applied to
bone movement and not blendshapes. You can increase this value if the model is
shaking during during tracking. However a too high value will make it look
like the model is slow at reacting to movement. This value only takes effect
after the tracking is restarted.

## Head to body movement ratio

This value is a ratio between 0.0 and 1.0 (0% - 100%). It will determine how
much the head will move in relation to the body. If set to 0.0, only the head
will move. If set to 1.0, only the body will move. This value can be changed
at any time and will directly take effect.

## Body movement

The body movement will amplify the amount that the entire model will move. It
will affect the Hips bone, thus moving the entire model. A higher value will
allow the model to appear more lively and a lower value will make the model
more stationary. This value can be changed at any time and will directly take
effect.

## Eye gaze strength

This value is only used when OpenSeeFace tracking is used. A higher value in
this setting will amplify the movement of the eyes. Different models will
require different values in order to look natrual. This value can be change at
any time and will directly take effect.

## Mirror movement

Enabling this setting will mirror the movements of the model. This setting is
still experimental. If you want to capture your model in a mirrored way it is
recommended to flip the window capture instead.

# Calibration

Because VTube Studio do most calibration on the data producer side it is not
required to calibrate it. Only OpenSeeFace needs calibration because the add-
on calculates the vowels on its own based on a few data parameters. The reset
pose can always be used to re-center the character to the middle of the
screen.

![](images/calibration.jpg)

## Reset vowel

This setting is only used for OpenSeeFace. In order to calibrate your tracking
must be started. When calibrating a vowel, you first select the vowel that you
want to calibrate in the drop-down menu. Then you make the face that is the
vowel and press the "Reset vowel" button. For example when calibrating A
vowel. Select A in the drop down, say A out loudly and press the "Reset vowel"
button. It will record your current mouth shape and save it as the A vowel.
This is later used to calculate your mouth shape when you talk.

The "Neutral" vowel is when you are silent. Calibrate this with your mouth
closed and a neutral face.

## Recording
You can record shapekeys and bones separately or together by checking the boxes. This will insert a new keyframe each time the model updates. In order to record it you press play on the timeline. If there already is a recording the model may stutter as it can not decide which pose to show. As long as your framerate for the tracker is greater than the framerate of the project, all keyframes should be overwritten by new ones and stuttering should not happen.

You can prevent the tracker from applying any data by using the disable checkboxes. Lets say you have recorded motion and only want to record the shapekeys, you can check "Disable bones" and it will not change any bone positions.

## Reset pose

This button will re-center your model to the initial position. If your model
is moved in a strange angle or has floated away in the distance this will
bring it back to the center.

